.. SSAGES documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Jun  6 16:05:35 2016.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to SSAGES!
==================

In their simplest form, particle based simulations are limited to generating
ensembles of configurations (in Monte Carlo [MC] simulations) or trajectories
in time (in molecular dynamics [MD] or Brownian dynamics [BD]). One can then
extract mechanical variables such as the potential energy or pressure and
perform ensemble or time averages. There are two important limitations to such
calculations: 1) for complex materials, the time scales available to standard
MD simulations are often insufficient to sample relevant regions of phase
space; 2) in order to develop a fundamental understanding of materials,
researchers are primarily interested in calculating the free energy, the
entropy, and their derivatives with respect to various thermodynamic
quantities (which lead to material properties such as elastic moduli, heat
capacity, and various other susceptibilities; these quantities are difficult
to obtain or intractable in standard MC and MD simulations. To overcome these
limitations, MC and MD simulations must be supplemented with advanced sampling
techniques. These methods are critical for the efficient simulation of complex
assembly processes.

SSAGES (Software Suite for Advanced Generalized Ensemble Simulations) is
designed to perform these calculations. The framework is designed to treat
molecular simulation routines as a black box, using the coordinates of the
system as evolved by an MC or MD engine to compute collective variables which
permit a meaningful reduced-dimensionality representation of the phase space
within a system. This information is then used to define evolving reactive
pathways or to bias the statistics of a simulation for the purposes of
computing free energies. The internal structure of the code has been designed
to be simple and extensible to new methods and sampling engines. For further
details on examples and capabilities of SSAGES, peruse the documentation
for :ref:`specifc modules <advanced-sampling-methods>`.

Contents:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   Introduction
   Getting Started
   Input Files
   Engines
   Collective Variables
   Advanced Sampling Methods
   Write your own Methods and CVs
   Contribute to SSAGES
   The SSAGES Cookbook
   Acknowledgements
   License

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

